---
layout: post
title: Matroid
---

This post is about matroid, greedy algorithm, and graph theory.

## Definitions

### Finite matroid

__Definition.__ A _finite matroid_ $\mathcal M$ is a pair $(E, \mathcal I)$ where $E$ is a finite set (called the __ground set__) and $\mathcal I$ is a family of subsets (called the __independent sets__) of $E$ satisfying

1. __Non-emptiness:__ $\emptyset\in\mathcal I\,;$
1. __Hereditary:__ $A\in\mathcal I\implies\forall B\subset A:B\in\mathcal I\,;$
1. __Augmentation:__ $A\in\mathcal I,B\in\mathcal I,\|B\|>\|A\|\implies\exists x\in B\setminus A:A\cup\\{x\\}\in\mathcal I\,.$

### Basis

__Definition.__ A _maximal independent set_ of a matroid, aka a _basis_ of a matroid, is an independent set which becomes dependent on adding any element of $E\,.$ Specifically, $A$ is a basis of matroid $\mathcal M=(E, \mathcal I)$ iff

$$A\in\mathcal I, \forall x\in E\setminus A:A\cup\\{x\\}\notin\mathcal I\,.$$

### Weighted matroid

__Definition.__ A _weighted matroid_ is a matroid $\mathcal M=(E, \mathcal I)$ together with a function from its elements to the non-negative real numbers:

$$w:E\to\mathbb R_{\ge0}\,.$$

__Definition.__ The weight of a set is the sum of the weights of the elements in the set:

$$w(A)=\sum_{x\in A}w(x)\,.$$

## Greedy algorithm

The greedy algorithm can be used to find a maximum (or minimum) weighted basis of any given matroid, by starting from the empty set and repeatedly adding one element at a time, at each step choosing a maximum weighted element among the elements whose addition would preserve the independence of the augmented set.

> __Data:__ a matroid $\mathcal M=(E, \mathcal I)\,,$ and a function $w:E\to\mathbb R_{\ge0}\,.$

> __Result:__ a maximum weighted basis of $\mathcal M$

> sort $E$ in decreasing order of weight

> $A\leftarrow\emptyset$

> __for all__ $x\in E$ __do__
>
> > __if__ $A\cup\\{x\\}\in\mathcal I$ __then__
> >
> > > $A\leftarrow A\cup\\{x\\}$;
> >
> > __end if__
>
> __end for__

> __return__ $A$

### Proof

__Lemma 1.__ If $x$ is the element of the maximum weight satisfying $\{x\}\in \mathcal I\,,$ then $x\in A$ where $A$ is the maximal independent set of maximum weight.

__Lemma 2.__ $A$ is the maximal independent set of the maximum weight. $A'$ is a proper subset of $A\,.$ $x$ is the element of the maximum weight that satisfies:

1. $\\{x\\}\in\mathcal I\,,$
1. $x\notin A'\,.$

then $x\in A\,,$ viz. $A'\cup\\{x\\}\subseteq A\,.$

The validities of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 are obvious. Therefore we know the algorithm returns a maximum weighted basis for the given matroid.

## Minimum spanning tree

__Lemma 3.__ Given $G=(V,E)$ be a weighted, connected, and undirected graph, $\mathcal M=(E, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid when $\mathcal I=\\{A\mid A\subseteq E,(V,A)\text{ is a forest}\\}\,.$

__Proof.__

1. __Non-emptiness:__ $\emptyset\in E\,,$ since $\emptyset$ forms a forest that each vertex is a tree;
1. __Hereditary:__ If $(V,B)$ is a forest, then for all $A\subset B\,,\,(V,A)$ is a forest;
1. __Augmentation:__ Graph $(V,A)$ is a forest of $\|V\|-\|A\|$ trees; graph $(V,B)$ is a forest of $\|V\|-\|B\|$ trees. We need to prove that there exists an edge in $B$ that keeps $(V,A)$ a forest when added to $A\,,$ viz. there exists an edge in $B$ that merge two of the trees in $(V,A)$ into a new tree rather than produce a circle. This could be proven by contradiction: Assume there does not exist an edge in $B$ that merge two of the trees in $(V,A)$ into a new tree, viz. for all edges in $B\,,\,(V,A)$ becomes a cyclic graph when the edge is added. Therefore, $(V,B)$ contains equal or more connected components than $(V,A)\,,$ viz. $\|V\|-\|B\|\ge\|V\|-\|A\|\,,$ which is a contradiction against $\|B\|>\|A\|\,.$ Therefore the assumption is false and the augmentation holds.

__Lemma 4.__ For every basis $A$ of matroid $\mathcal M\,,\,(V,A)$ is a spanning trees of graph $G\,.$

This one is self-proving.

By Lemma 3 and Lemma 4 we know that finding a maximum weighted basis of a matroid is equivalent to finding a minimum spanning tree of a undirected graph. The greedy algorithm is equivalent to Kruskal's algorithm.

## Duality

__Definition.__ If $\mathcal M$ is a finite matroid, define the _dual_ $\mathcal M^\*$ of $\mathcal M$ by taking the same ground set and calling a set a basis in $\mathcal M^*$ iff its complement is a basis in $\mathcal M\,.$

__Theorem 1.__ The dual of a matroid is a matroid.

## Another theorem

__Theorem 2.__ For a matroid $\mathcal M=(E,\mathcal I)$ and a positive integer $k\,,\,\mathcal M_k=(E,\mathcal I_k)$ is a matroid where $\mathcal I_k=\\{A\mid A\in\mathcal I,\|A\|\le k\\}\,.$

## Another problem

__Problem.__ For a given weighted undirected graph $G=(V, E)\,,$ find $k$ edges whose removal keeps the graph a single connected component, and maximize/minimize the weight of the resulting graph.

__Solution.__ A matroid could be defined and the original problem could be reduced into a maximum basis problem of that matroid.

Define $\mathcal M_1=(E,\mathcal I_1)\,,$ where $\mathcal I_1$ is the family of subsets $A$ that $(V,A)$ is a spanning forest of graph $G\,.$ From __Lemma 3.__ it could be drawn that $\mathcal M_1$ is a matroid. From __Lemma 4.__ we know that for every basis $T$ of $\mathcal M_1\,,\,(V,T)$ is a spanning tree of graph $G\,.$

Define $\mathcal M_2=(E,\mathcal I_2)\,,$ which is the dual of $\mathcal M_1\,.$ From __Theorem 1.__ we know that $\mathcal M_2$ is a matroid. Since $\mathcal M_2$ is the dual of $\mathcal M_1\,,$ we know for every basis $A$ of $\mathcal M_2\,,\,(V,E\setminus A)$ is spanning tree, and for every subset $A$ of $\mathcal M_2\,,\,(V,E\setminus A)$ is a single connected component.

Define $\mathcal M_3=(E,\mathcal I_3)\,,$ where $\mathcal I_3=\\{A\mid A\in\mathcal I_2,\|A\|\le k\\}\,.$ From __Theorem 2.__ we know that $\mathcal M_3$ is a matroid. Since $\mathcal I_3\subseteq\mathcal I_2\,,$ we know that for every subset $A$ of $\mathcal M_3\,,\,(V,E\setminus A)$ is a single connected component.

$\\{(V,A)\mid A\text{ is a basis of }\mathcal M_3\\}$ is a set of all connected subgraphs by removing $k$ edges from $G\,.$ Therefore, $(V,A)$ is the solution of the original problem when $A$ is the maximum basis of $\mathcal M_3\,.$
